\input texinfo  @c -*- mode: texinfo; coding: utf-8 -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename howm-todo.info
@settitle howm-todo @value{VERSION}
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@set VERSION 0.1.0
@set UPDATED 2026-05-16
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for howm-todo, version @value{VERSION}, last updated
@value{UPDATED}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 Blaine Mooers.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.
@end quotation

The howm-todo Emacs Lisp package is free software: you can redistribute
it and/or modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License
as published by the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the
License, or (at your option) any later version.
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* howm-todo: (howm-todo).       Prioritized TODO items for Howm and Org-mode.
@end direntry

@titlepage
@title howm-todo
@subtitle Prioritized TODO items for Howm and Org-mode
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author Blaine Mooers @email{blaine-mooers@@ou.edu}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top howm-todo

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What howm-todo does and why.
* Installation::                Manual install, straight.el, use-package.
* Concepts::                    Priority cookies and tag conventions.
* Commands::                    The five interactive commands.
* Customization::               User-options exposed by the package.
* SQLite Project Database::     Schema, detection, and backends.
* Tag Merging::                 How project tags compose with existing tags.
* Keybindings::                 Suggested key map.
* Testing::                     Running the ERT suite.
* GNU Free Documentation License::
* Index::
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex Howm
@cindex Org-mode

The @code{howm-todo} package provides cross-compatible TODO
prioritization that works in both @uref{https://kaorahi.github.io/howm/, Howm}
notes and in Org-mode files.  Org-mode picks up the literal keyword
@code{TODO} in its agenda views, and Howm leaves the line alone, so a
single marker form serves both tools.

The marker takes the form @code{TODO [XY]}.  @code{X} is an uppercase
letter that names a priority group.  @code{Y} is a non-negative integer
that ranks the item inside the group.  A larger @code{Y} means lower
priority, so @code{[A1]} outranks @code{[A2]} which outranks
@code{[A44]} which outranks @code{[B1]}.

The package supports three workflows.

@enumerate
@item
Selecting a region of manually ordered items and adding @code{TODO [XY]}
markers across them.  Blank lines separate priority groups.

@item
Sorting an already-marked region by @code{[XY]} priority.

@item
Stripping markers from a region so the items can be re-prioritized the
next day.
@end enumerate

A fourth workflow attaches an Org-style @code{:project:} tag to a marked
line by reading project names from a SQLite database the user
maintains for time tracking.

@node Installation
@chapter Installation

@cindex installation
@cindex Makefile
@cindex install-info

@section Manual install with the Makefile

The simplest path is to clone or copy the source tree and run:

@example
make compile
make info
sudo make install
@end example

@noindent
By default the package installs into
@file{/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp/howm-todo} and the info file
installs into @file{/usr/local/share/info}.  Override @code{PREFIX},
@code{ELISPDIR}, or @code{INFODIR} on the command line to install
elsewhere.

@example
make install PREFIX=$HOME/.local
@end example

After install, add the install directory to @code{load-path} and call
@code{require}:

@lisp
(add-to-list 'load-path "/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp/howm-todo")
(require 'howm-todo)
@end lisp

@section straight.el

@lisp
(straight-use-package
 '(howm-todo :type git
             :host github
             :repo "blaine-mooers/howm-todo"))
@end lisp

@section use-package with straight

@lisp
(use-package howm-todo
  :straight (howm-todo :type git
                       :host github
                       :repo "blaine-mooers/howm-todo")
  :commands (howm-todo-prioritize-region
             howm-todo-strip-region
             howm-todo-sort-region
             howm-todo-add-project-tag
             howm-todo-tag-region)
  :custom
  (howm-todo-db-path "~/60003TimeTracking/cb/tenKprojects.db"))
@end lisp

@node Concepts
@chapter Concepts

@cindex priority cookie
@cindex group letter

A @dfn{priority cookie} is the bracketed text @code{[XY]} that follows
the @code{TODO} keyword.

@table @asis
@item @code{X}, the @dfn{group letter}
A single uppercase letter from @code{A} through @code{Z}.  Groups model
coarse priority bands.  @code{A} is the most urgent.

@item @code{Y}, the @dfn{rank}
A non-negative integer.  Smaller is higher priority.  @code{Y} may have
one or more digits.  The package sorts numerically, so @code{C2}
outranks @code{C10} which outranks @code{C100}.
@end table

@cindex tag, Org-style

The @dfn{project tag} is an Org-style @code{:tag:} block appended to
the end of a marked line.  When the line already ends with one or more
@code{:foo:bar:} tags, the new tag is merged into that block as
@code{:foo:bar:new:} rather than starting a second block.

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

@cindex commands

@deffn Command howm-todo-prioritize-region beg end
Add @code{TODO [XY]} prefixes to every non-empty line in the region
between @var{beg} and @var{end}.  Blank lines separate priority groups,
so the first contiguous block of non-empty lines is labeled @code{A1},
@code{A2}, @code{A3}, the second block becomes @code{B1}, @code{B2},
and so on.  Any pre-existing @code{TODO [XY]} markers in the region are
stripped first, so the command is idempotent and safe to run more than
once.  Leading whitespace on each line is preserved.
@end deffn

@deffn Command howm-todo-strip-region beg end
Remove every @code{TODO [XY]} marker from each line between @var{beg}
and @var{end}.  Leading whitespace is preserved.  Use this command
before re-prioritizing items the next day.
@end deffn

@deffn Command howm-todo-sort-region beg end
Sort the lines between @var{beg} and @var{end} by their @code{TODO
[XY]} priority.  Lines that have no marker sink to the end of the
region and keep their original relative order.  The sort is stable
among lines that share the same priority cookie.
@end deffn

@deffn Command howm-todo-add-project-tag
Append an Org-style @code{:project:} tag to the end of the current
@code{TODO} line.  The project name is read from the SQLite database
referenced by @code{howm-todo-db-path} through
@code{completing-read}.  When the line already ends with a
@code{:foo:bar:} block, the new tag is merged into that block.  When
the project tag is already present, the command is a no-op.  Signals
an error when the current line has no @code{TODO [XY]} marker.
@end deffn

@deffn Command howm-todo-tag-region beg end
Walk every line between @var{beg} and @var{end} and call
@code{howm-todo-add-project-tag} on each line that carries a @code{TODO
[XY]} marker.  Unmarked lines are skipped.
@end deffn

@node Customization
@chapter Customization

@cindex customization

@defopt howm-todo-db-path
Absolute path to the SQLite database that holds project metadata.

Default: @file{~/60003TimeTracking/cb/tenKprojects.db}.
@end defopt

@defopt howm-todo-db-table
Table in the database that holds the project rows.  When @code{nil},
@code{howm-todo} inspects every table in the database and picks the
first one whose schema includes a column named by
@code{howm-todo-db-column}.

Default: @code{nil} (auto-detect).
@end defopt

@defopt howm-todo-db-column
Column name to read project names from.

Default: @code{"ProjectDirectory"}.
@end defopt

@defopt howm-todo-keyword
Leading keyword on a prioritized line.  Both Howm and Org-mode
recognize the literal text @code{TODO} at the start of a line.
Changing this value lets you adopt a different word without modifying
the package.

Default: @code{"TODO"}.
@end defopt

@defopt howm-todo-tag-use-basename
When non-@code{nil}, the Org tag is built from the basename of the
project path returned by the database.  When @code{nil}, the full path
is sanitized into a tag.

Default: @code{t}.
@end defopt

@node SQLite Project Database
@chapter SQLite Project Database

@cindex SQLite
@cindex tenKprojects.db
@cindex backend

The package prefers the built-in @code{sqlite} library shipped with
Emacs 29 or newer compiled with @code{--with-sqlite3}.  When the
built-in library is unavailable, the package falls back to the
@command{sqlite3} command-line shell.  Either backend is enough.

The default expected schema looks like:

@example
CREATE TABLE projects (
    id               INTEGER PRIMARY KEY,
    ProjectDirectory TEXT
);
@end example

@noindent
The table name is not significant when @code{howm-todo-db-table} is
@code{nil}; the package detects whichever table contains the
@code{ProjectDirectory} column.  If you keep your projects in a
different column, set @code{howm-todo-db-column}.  If multiple tables
contain that column, set @code{howm-todo-db-table} explicitly to pin
detection.

Project names are de-duplicated and sorted before they are presented to
@code{completing-read}, so the picker is consistent regardless of how
many duplicate rows you have in the table.

@node Tag Merging
@chapter Tag Merging

@cindex tag merging

@code{howm-todo-add-project-tag} preserves any Org-style tag block that
already trails the line.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.5 0.5
@headitem Before @tab After (adding @code{garden})
@item @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn} @tab @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :garden:}
@item @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :home:} @tab @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :home:garden:}
@item @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :home:outdoor:} @tab @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :home:outdoor:garden:}
@item @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :garden:} @tab @code{TODO [A1] mow lawn :garden:} (no change)
@end multitable

@node Keybindings
@chapter Keybindings

@cindex keybindings

The package does not bind any keys by default.  The following bindings
are a reasonable starting point.

@lisp
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c j p") #'howm-todo-prioritize-region)
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c j s") #'howm-todo-strip-region)
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c j o") #'howm-todo-sort-region)
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c j t") #'howm-todo-add-project-tag)
(define-key global-map (kbd "C-c j T") #'howm-todo-tag-region)
@end lisp

@node Testing
@chapter Testing

@cindex testing
@cindex ERT

Run the test suite from the source directory:

@example
make test
@end example

@noindent
The Makefile invokes Emacs in batch mode and runs the suite from
@file{howm-todo-tests.el}.  SQLite-related tests are skipped
automatically when neither the built-in sqlite library nor the
@command{sqlite3} shell is on @code{PATH}.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@appendix GNU Free Documentation License

This documentation is distributed under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License, Version 1.3 or any later version published by
the Free Software Foundation.  See
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl-1.3.html} for the full text.

@node Index
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
